# Project Synopsis

In this project, we examined the effects of environmental caffeine exposure on Hemigrapsus oregonensis shore crabs' stress response. Caffeine is a prevalent pharmaceutically active pollutant that finds its ways into bodies of water through wastewater, typically from human excretion. The presence of caffeine within water bodies results in accumulation within marine life tissues. Aquatic species have been reported to experience oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, mortality, and reproductive failure after prolonged exposure to caffeine. As crabs are an essential member of the intertidal, as well as being ideal bioindicators, making them a model species to examine for the effects of caffeine exposure, as scientists have already found it impacts their digestive tract, muscle functions, and stress response. We hypothesized that higher concentrations of caffeine will result in a higher physiological response (ie. slower righting time, more oxygen consumption, higher lactate concentrations). Our null hypothesis stated that there would be no effect on caffeine exposure to stress response. In order to test caffeine's effect, we exposed H. oregonensis crabs to different doses of caffeine (5, 15, and 20 µg/L) for 14 days. Tests were taken on crab righting time, dissolved oxygen consumption, and the concentrations of lactate within their hemolymph. We conclude that environmental caffeine exposure does trigger a physiological stress response in H. oregonensis and that higher concentrations of caffeine result in a larger stress response. Crabs in the high dose had higher lactate concentrations than the other two dose groups and had higher resazurin fluorescence in week 1. In week 2, we found that the high dose crabs were sluggish and likely near the end of their lives, resulting in the different resazurin fluorescence we see. Crabs in the high dose also experienced muscle cramping, cannibalism, higher rates of mortality, and went as far as escaping the tank to leave the caffeine concentrations. 
